Add OTLP Trace Data Format specification (#59)
open-telemetry/oteps: text/0059-otlp-trace-data-format.md

_Author: Tigran Najaryan, Splunk_

**Status:** `approved`

OTLP Trace Data Format specification describes the structure of the trace data that is transported by OpenTelemetry Protocol (RFC0035).

## Motivation

This document is a continuation of OpenTelemetry Protocol RFC0035 and is necessary part of OTLP specification.

## Explanation

OTLP Trace Data Format is primarily inherited from OpenCensus protocol. Several changes are introduced with the goal of more efficient serialization. Notable differences from OpenCensus protocol are:

1. Removed `Node` as a concept.
2. Extended `Resource` to better describe the source of the telemetry data.
3. Replaced attribute maps by lists of key/value pairs.
4. Eliminated unnecessary additional nesting in various values.

Changes 1-2 are conceptual, changes 3-4 improve performance.

## Internal details

This section specifies data format in Protocol Buffers.

### Resource

```protobuf
// Resource information. This describes the source of telemetry data.
message Resource {
  // labels is a collection of attributes that describe the resource. See OpenTelemetry
  // specification semantic conventions for standardized label names:

>   // https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/data-semantic-conventions.md

Reviewer: wrong link. It is a separate document

Author: Fixed.

  int32 dropped_attributes_count = 11;

  // TimedEvent is a time-stamped annotation of the span, consisting of either
  // user-supplied key-value pairs, or details of a message sent/received between Spans.
  message TimedEvent {
    // time_unixnano is the time the event occurred.
    int64 time_unixnano = 1;

    // name is a user-supplied description of the event.
    string name = 2;

    // attributes is a collection of attribute key/value pairs on the event.
    repeated AttributeKeyValue attributes = 3;

    // dropped_attributes_count is the number of dropped attributes. If the value is 0,
    // then no attributes were dropped.
    int32 dropped_attributes_count = 4;
  }

  // timed_events is a collection of TimedEvent items.
  repeated TimedEvent timed_events = 12;

  // dropped_timed_events_count is the number of dropped timed events. If the value is 0,
  // then no events were dropped.
  int32 dropped_timed_events_count = 13;

  // Link is a pointer from the current span to another span in the same trace or in a
  // different trace. For example, this can be used in batching operations,
  // where a single batch handler processes multiple requests from different

>   // traces or when the handler receives a request from a different project.

Reviewer: You can also point to the overview document describing links

Author: Done.

    // dropped_attributes_count is the number of dropped attributes. If the value is 0,
    // then no attributes were dropped.
    int32 dropped_attributes_count = 5;
  }

  // links is a collection of Links, which are references from this span to a span
  // in the same or different trace.
  repeated Link links = 14;

  // dropped_links_count is the number of dropped links after the maximum size was
  // enforced. If this value is 0, then no links were dropped.
  int32 dropped_links_count = 15;

  // status is an optional final status for this span. Semantically when status
  // wasn't set it is means span ended without errors and assume Status.Ok (code = 0).
  Status status = 16;

  // child_span_count is an optional number of child spans that were generated while this
  // span was active. If set, allows an implementation to detect missing child spans.
  int32 child_span_count = 17;
}

// The `Status` type defines a logical error model that is suitable for different
// programming environments, including REST APIs and RPC APIs.
message Status {
  // The status code. This is optional field. It is safe to assume 0 (OK)
  // when not set.
  int32 code = 1;

>   // A developer-facing error message, which should be in English.

Reviewer: this is new comparing to the spec. Perhaps add a note here: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/485e6a5cd6290a9ef1eda20a6e68de897548ddc4/specification/api-tracing.md#set-status

Reviewer: I mean that it should be in English

Author: I rephrased and removed reference to English, please have a look again.

  string message = 2;
}
```

### AttributeKeyValue

```protobuf
// AttributeKeyValue is a key-value pair that is used to store Span attributes, Resource
// labels, etc.
message AttributeKeyValue {
  // ValueType is the enumeration of possible types that value can have.
  enum ValueType {
    STRING  = 0;
    BOOL    = 1;
    INT64   = 2;
    DOUBLE  = 3;
  };

  // key part of the key-value pair.
  string key = 1;

  // The type of the value.
  ValueType type = 2;

  // Only one of the following fields is supposed to contain data (determined by `type` field value).
  // This is deliberately not using Protobuf `oneof` for performance reasons (verified by benchmarks).

>   // A string up to 256 bytes long.

Reviewer: this is a new limitation. Should it be also mentioned in specs?

Author: I copied this from OpenCensus proto, but I wonder if we need it in protobuf definition? If there is a need for limitation I think it can be in SDK, doesn't have to be here. I am willing to remove this and allow unlimited length strings. What do you think?

Reviewer: go for it

Author: Length limitation removed.

  string string_value = 3;
  // A 64-bit signed integer.
  int64 int64_value = 4;
  // A Boolean value represented by `true` or `false`.
  bool bool_value = 5;
  // A double value.
  double double_value = 6;
}
```

## Trade-offs and mitigations

> Timestamps were changed from google.protobuf.Timestamp to a int64 representation in Unix epoch nanoseconds. This change reduces the type-safety but benchmarks show that for small spans there is 15-20% encoding/decoding CPU speed gain. This is the right trade-off to make because encoding/decoding CPU consumption tends to dominate many workloads (particularly in OpenTelemetry Service).

Reviewer: wow. I wonder than why anybody uses `google.protobuf.Timestamp`?

Author: 1. google.protobuf.Timestamp supports larger date range, but I think we are fine with supporting only for the next 240 years in this protocol. This is plenty of time for our successors to come up with a better protocol :-)
2. google.protobuf.Timestamp value also can be omitted, unspecified, while timestamp in nanoseconds cannot (if you omit it you will get 0 value which is a valid timestamp - so cannot differentiate a valid 0 timestamp from missing timestamp). I believe this is also a non-issue for traces since trace timestamps are mandatory.

## Motivation

This document is a continuation of OpenTelemetry Protocol RFC0035 and is necessary part of OTLP specification.

## Explanation

OTLP Trace Data Format is primarily inherited from OpenCensus protocol. Several changes are introduced with the goal of more efficient serialization. Notable differences from OpenCensus protocol are:

1. Removed `Node` as a concept.
2. Extended `Resource` to better describe the source of the telemetry data.
3. Replaced attribute maps by lists of key/value pairs.
4. Eliminated unnecessary additional nesting in various values.

Changes 1-2 are conceptual, changes 3-4 improve performance.

## Internal details

This section specifies data format in Protocol Buffers.

### Resource

```protobuf
// Resource information. This describes the source of telemetry data.
message Resource {
  // labels is a collection of attributes that describe the resource. See OpenTelemetry
  // specification semantic conventions for standardized label names:
  // https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/data-resource-semantic-conventions.md

>   repeated AttributeKeyValue labels = 1;

Reviewer 2: Why do we need to introduce the term "labels"? It feels confusing and adding little value over "attributes".

Author: This is not new in this proposal. "labels" are the term used in the specification currently: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/sdk-resource.md

I agree it would likely make sense to make this uniform. I created an issue for that https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/342

Author: Resolving, issue created to track this separately.

  // dropped_labels_count is the number of dropped labels. If the value is 0, then
  // no labels were dropped.
  int32 dropped_labels_count = 2;
}
```

### Span

```protobuf
// Span represents a single operation within a trace. Spans can be
// nested to form a trace tree. Spans may also be linked to other spans
// from the same or different trace and form graphs. Often, a trace
// contains a root span that describes the end-to-end latency, and one
// or more subspans for its sub-operations. A trace can also contain
// multiple root spans, or none at all. Spans do not need to be
// contiguous - there may be gaps or overlaps between spans in a trace.
//
// The next field id is 18.
message Span {
  // trace_id is the unique identifier of a trace. All spans from the same trace share
  // the same `trace_id`. The ID is a 16-byte array. An ID with all zeroes
  // is considered invalid.
  //

>   // This field is semantically required. If empty or invalid trace_id was received:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // This field is semantically required. If empty or invalid trace_id is received:
```

  // - The receiver MAY reject the invalid data and respond with the appropriate error
  //   code to the sender.
  // - The receiver MAY accept the invalid data and attempt to correct it.
  bytes trace_id = 1;

  // span_id is a unique identifier for a span within a trace, assigned when the span
  // is created. The ID is an 8-byte array. An ID with all zeroes is considered
  // invalid.
  //

>   // This field is semantically required. If empty or invalid span_id was received:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // This field is semantically required. If empty or invalid span_id is received:
```

    // between producer and consumer spans.
    CONSUMER = 5;
  }

  // kind field distinguishes between spans generated in a particular context. For example,
  // two spans with the same name may be distinguished using `CLIENT` (caller)
  // and `SERVER` (callee) to identify network latency associated with the span.
  SpanKind kind = 7;

  // start_time_unixnano is the start time of the span. On the client side, this is the time
  // kept by the local machine where the span execution starts. On the server side, this
  // is the time when the server's application handler starts running.
  //
  // This field is semantically required and it is expected that end_time >= start_time.
  //
  // This field is required.
  int64 start_time_unixnano = 8;

  // end_time_unixnano is the end time of the span. On the client side, this is the time
  // kept by the local machine where the span execution ends. On the server side, this
  // is the time when the server application handler stops running.
  //
  // This field is semantically required and it is expected that end_time >= start_time.
  //
  // This field is required.
  int64 end_time_unixnano = 9;

>   // attributes is a collection of attribute key/value pairs. The value can be a string,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // attributes is a collection of key/value pairs enriching the semantic meaning of the span. The value can be a string,
```

  // an integer, a double or the Boolean values `true` or `false`. Note, global attributes

>   // like server name can be set as tags using resource API. Examples of attributes:

Reviewer 2: can we avoid extra terminology?

```suggestion
  // like server name can be set using the resource API. Examples of attributes:
```

  //
  //     "/http/user_agent": "Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_14_2) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/71.0.3578.98 Safari/537.36"
  //     "/http/server_latency": 300
  //     "abc.com/myattribute": true
  //     "abc.com/score": 10.239
  repeated AttributeKeyValue attributes = 10;

  // dropped_attributes_count is the number of attributes that were discarded. Attributes
  // can be discarded because their keys are too long or because there are too many
  // attributes. If this value is 0, then no attributes were dropped.

>   int32 dropped_attributes_count = 11;

Reviewer 2: feels like this should be DRYed into a `struct { attributes, dropped_count }` that can be reused in other entities like Resource, TimedEvent. The naming will be odd though, `span.attributes.attributes`

Author: I agree it would be more DRY, but unfortunately it has measurable performance impact.

Reviewer 3: Should we use fixed64?

Author: I tried fixed32 and don't see any measurable difference in speed (only slight increase of uncompressed wire size).

I can change to fixed if there is any argument in favour of it.

    // The ID is a 16-byte array.
    bytes trace_id = 1;

    // span_id is a unique identifier for the linked span. The ID is an 8-byte array.
    bytes span_id = 2;

    // tracestate is the trace state associated with the link.
    repeated TraceStateEntry tracestate = 3;

    // attributes is a collection of attribute key/value pairs on the link.
    repeated AttributeKeyValue attributes = 4;

    // dropped_attributes_count is the number of dropped attributes. If the value is 0,
    // then no attributes were dropped.
    int32 dropped_attributes_count = 5;
  }

  // links is a collection of Links, which are references from this span to a span
  // in the same or different trace.
  repeated Link links = 14;

  // dropped_links_count is the number of dropped links after the maximum size was
  // enforced. If this value is 0, then no links were dropped.
  int32 dropped_links_count = 15;

  // status is an optional final status for this span. Semantically when status
  // wasn't set it is means span ended without errors and assume Status.Ok (code = 0).
  Status status = 16;

  // child_span_count is an optional number of child spans that were generated while this

>   // span was active. If set, allows an implementation to detect missing child spans.

Reviewer 2: this is unclear, per resolved thread below. Is this the number of local-only children? If so, the doc string should be explicit about it.

Author: Added clarification to make it explictely about local children.

  int32 child_span_count = 17;
}

// The `Status` type defines a logical error model that is suitable for different
// programming environments, including REST APIs and RPC APIs.
message Status {
  // The status code. This is optional field. It is safe to assume 0 (OK)
  // when not set.

>   int32 code = 1;

Reviewer 2: I don't quite follow this one. If there is no prescribed enumeration of the possible values for `code`, then the field seems to be of little value. The main value of "status" to me if it was normalized and independent of the actual RPC API.

Reviewer 2: NB: in OpenTracing this was really just `error=true` tag. The actual RPC error code would be recorded as another tag, like `http.status_code` (the tag would be specific to the RPC protocol).

Author: Agree. I will add an enum that mirrors the spec: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/api-tracing.md#statuscanonicalcode

Author: Enum added.

# OTLP Trace Data Format

_Author: Tigran Najaryan, Splunk_

**Status:** `proposed`

OTLP Trace Data Format specification describes the structure of the trace data that is transported by OpenTelemetry Protocol (RFC0035).

## Motivation

This document is a continuation of OpenTelemetry Protocol RFC0035 and is necessary part of OTLP specification.

## Explanation

OTLP Trace Data Format is primarily inherited from OpenCensus protocol. Several changes are introduced with the goal of more efficient serialization. Notable differences from OpenCensus protocol are:

1. Removed `Node` as a concept.
2. Extended `Resource` to better describe the source of the telemetry data.
3. Replaced attribute maps by lists of key/value pairs.
4. Eliminated unnecessary additional nesting in various values.

Changes 1-2 are conceptual, changes 3-4 improve performance.

## Internal details

This section specifies data format in Protocol Buffers.

### Resource

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```protobuf
```

// Resource information. This describes the source of telemetry data.
message Resource {
  // labels is a list of attributes that describe the resource. See OpenTelemetry specification
  // semantic conventions for standardized label names:
  // https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/data-semantic-conventions.md
  repeated AttributeKeyValue labels = 1;

  // dropped_labels_count is the number of dropped labels. If the value is 0, then
  // no labels were dropped.
  int32 dropped_labels_count = 2;
}
```

### Span

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```protobuf
```

// contains a root span that describes the end-to-end latency, and one
// or more subspans for its sub-operations. A trace can also contain
// multiple root spans, or none at all. Spans do not need to be
// contiguous - there may be gaps or overlaps between spans in a trace.
//
// The next field id is 18.
message Span {
  // trace_id is the unique identifier of a trace. All spans from the same trace share
  // the same `trace_id`. The ID is a 16-byte array. An ID with all zeroes
  // is considered invalid.
  //
  // This field is semantically required. Receiver should generate new
  // random trace_id if empty or invalid trace_id was received.
  //
  // This field is required.
  bytes trace_id = 1;

  // span_id is a unique identifier for a span within a trace, assigned when the span
  // is created. The ID is an 8-byte array. An ID with all zeroes is considered
  // invalid.
  //
  // This field is semantically required. Receiver should generate new
  // random span_id if empty or invalid span_id was received.
  //
  // This field is required.
  bytes span_id = 2;

  // TraceEntry is the entry that is repeated in tracestate field (see below).

>   message TraceEntry {

Reviewer: why not tracestate? curious

Reviewer 4: Because it's a single entry in the tracestate. But maybe it could be named `TraceStateEntry`.

Author: I will change to `TraceStateEntry`, it is a better name.

    // key must begin with a lowercase letter, and can only contain
    // lowercase letters 'a'-'z', digits '0'-'9', underscores '_', dashes
    // '-', asterisks '*', and forward slashes '/'.
    string key = 1;

    // value is opaque string up to 256 characters printable ASCII
    // RFC0020 characters (i.e., the range 0x20 to 0x7E) except ',' and '='.
    // Note that this also excludes tabs, newlines, carriage returns, etc.
    string value = 2;
  }

  // TraceState conveys information about request position in multiple distributed tracing graphs.
  // It is a list of Tracestate.Entry with a maximum of 32 members in the list.
  //
  // See the https://github.com/w3c/distributed-tracing for more details about this field.
  repeated TraceEntry tracestate = 3;

  // parent_span_id is the `span_id` of this span's parent span. If this is a root span, then this
  // field must be omitted. The ID is an 8-byte array.
  bytes parent_span_id = 4;

  // resource that is associated with this span. Optional. If not set, this span

>   // should be part of a ResourceSpans message that does include the resource information,

Reviewer 4: I do not see the definition of a `ResourceSpans` message anywhere. I Imaginge it would just be
```protobuf
message ResourceSpans {
    Resource resource = 1;
    repeated Span spans = 2;
}
```

Author: It is defined in https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/35/files

    // 16-byte array.
    bytes trace_id = 1;

    // A unique identifier for the linked span. The ID is an 8-byte array.
    bytes span_id = 2;

    // The Tracestate associated with the link.
    repeated TraceEntry tracestate = 3;

    // A list of attributes of the link.
    repeated AttributeKeyValue attributes = 4;

    // dropped_attributes_count is the number of dropped attributes. If the value is 0, then
    // no attributes were dropped.
    int32 dropped_attributes_count = 5;
  }

  // links is a collection of Links, which are references from this span to a span
  // in the same or different trace.
  repeated Link links = 14;

  // dropped_links_count is the number of dropped links after the maximum size was enforced.
  // If this value is 0, then no links were dropped.
  int32 dropped_links_count = 15;

  // An optional final status for this span. Semantically when Status
  // wasn't set it is means span ended without errors and assume
  // Status.Ok (code = 0).
  Status status = 16;

  // An optional number of child spans that were generated while this span
  // was active. If set, allows an implementation to detect missing child spans.

>   int32 child_span_count = 17;

Reviewer 4: As I read the description, this will only count "local children". I think that it would be even more valuable for the back end to know the number of potential "remote children", i.e. the number of times the Span's SpanContext was propagated (this is also one of the motivations for #58 "Unseal SpanContext", but if that was doable with the reference SDK, that would of course be even nicer).

Author: Does the number of times SpanContext was propagated necessarily equal to the number of children created elsewhere? You may propagate once and create miltiple children, or propagate but do not create any children at all. I do not see how a number of propagations can reflect number of children or how you would otherwise be able to know how many child spans are generated somewhere else that you don't control.

Reviewer 4: Yes it's true that this is only a "potential" number of children, and not even a maximum. After reading your arguments, I guess the only value in a propagation count would be to check if it is > 0. So maybe a `bool was_propagated` would be good?

Reviewer 3: @Oberon00 you can use a combination of Kind + this to determine if the number is correctly calculated or not. For the Kind Server/Consumer/Internal the number is correct, for the Client/Producer the number will be 0 but without having a response header that determines if the next service created or not a Span is hard (even harder for Producer where the Consumer may be async and this Span will be sent ended).

@tigrannajaryan: in opencensus this was an Uint32 message because we believed that having the ability to use not-set value was important for cases like Client/Producer. What do you think?

Reviewer 4: @bogdandrutu I feel you assign more meaning to SpanKind than it reallly has. Cases where your assumption breaks:
* There is a DB client span that has a HTTP client span as local child that implements executing the request.
* The client call fails before an attempt to propagate the context is even made (e.g. connection refused for HTTP request).
* A client call is made but propagation is explicitly disabled (for example an HTTP integration may offer an option to suppress propagation for URLs that are known to go to external services).

Author: >in opencensus this was an Uint32 message because we believed that having the ability to use not-set value was important for cases like Client/Producer. What do you think?

@bogdandrutu yes, 0 in this case semantically is different from "not set" (which would mean we don't know). However I have a hard time imagining a use case where this difference matters.
In my mind I can imagine one good use case for `child_span_count` field: to indicate that there are missing children. For this I want to know that `child_span_count>0` and perhaps also show the actual counter in the UI (just to look nice). If the number is 0 or "not set" I will likely interpret it the same way, which is "I am not going to do anything special in this case".
Perhaps there is a good use case where this difference matters, if you have examples that would be great to know.

Author: I am resolving this since there are no further objections.

}

// The `Status` type defines a logical error model that is suitable for different
// programming environments, including REST APIs and RPC APIs.
message Status {
  // The status code. This is optional field. It is safe to assume 0 (OK)
  // when not set.
  int32 code = 1;

  // A developer-facing error message, which should be in English.
  string message = 2;
}
```

### AttributeKeyValue

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```protobuf
```

// AttributeKeyValue is a key-value pair that is used to store Span attributes, Resource
// labels, etc.
message AttributeKeyValue {
  // ValueType is the enumeration of possible types that value can have.
  enum ValueType {
    STRING  = 0;
    BOOL    = 1;
    INT64   = 2;
    DOUBLE  = 3;
  };

  // key part of the key-value pair.
  string key = 1;

  // The type of the value.
  ValueType type = 2;

  // Only one of the following fields is supposed to contain data (determined by `type` field value).

>   // This is deliberately not using Protobuf `oneof` for performance reasons (verified by benchmarks).

Reviewer 4: It's sad that we have to work around deficiencies in the performance of the code generated by the Protobuf Go compiler (I assume that's what you used for benchmarking) here. I assume there is no fundamental reason why the `oneof` should be slower.

Author: Yes, Go Protobuf compiler. If I remember correctly it generates additional pointer indirection for oneof.
